New blog post: Documentation Versioning (#74)
readthedocs/blog: documentation-versioning.rst

.. post:: July 23, 2019
   :tags: vcs, versioning
   :author: Manuel
   :location: BCN

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:

      Recommendations about how to do documentation versioning.

> Documentation Versioning: Good Practices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documentation Versioning: Best Practices
```

Believe this is probably the term of art.

========================================

Project releases and documentation versions are strongly related each other.

> We usually want to have a release ``1.0.3`` with it's own documentation version ``1.0.3`` that's specific for that release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We usually want to have a release ``1.0.3`` with it's own documentation version ``1.0.3`` for that specific release.
```

> You usually want to have a release ``1.0.3`` with it's own documentation version ``1.0.3`` for that specific release.

Reviewer 2: Django and Flask don't do this. I'd actually say if you're following semver you probably don't need to document below the minor version level (eg. `1.0.x`).

> In practice, when we make a new release of our software,

Reviewer: Less is more in writing :)

```suggestion
When we make a new release of our software,
```

you create a new tag in your :abbr:`VCS (Version Control System)` for this release and activate this new version on Read the Docs.

> At this point, Read the Docs will build and publish the new documentation version ``1.0.3`` for us.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, Read the Docs will build and publish the new documentation version ``1.0.3`` for you.
```

You use "you" in the rest of this paragraph so let's be consistent.

> This approach of "VCS tag" mapped to a "Read the Docs version" works in most of cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach of "VCS tag mapped to a Read the Docs version" works in most cases.
```

> Although, there could be some problems that may arise in time and that we can prevent using a different strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are sometimes problems with this approach that we can prevent using a different strategy.
```

Problems of using tags for documentation versions
-------------------------------------------------

The main problem of using VCS tags to build documentation versions is that they are static.

> This means, that once the tag is created it will never be modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a tag is created it can never be modified.
```

Could use a footnote saying "it's technically possible, but not recommended by all packaging tools"

> This may not seems like a problem at first sight since that's the main concept of :abbr:`VCS` tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may not seem like a problem at first, since that's the main concept of :abbr:`VCS` tags.
```

> Although, when talking about documentation versions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When talking about documentation versions,
```

> sometimes happen that after making a release there is a typo in the docs, or a small code example that does not work,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sometimes after making a release there is a typo in the docs, or a small code example that doesn't work,
```

> or a sentence that is confusing, etc. and we want to fix it to avoid this inconveniences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and we want to fix it.
```

> Making a new tag and release just for these small changes does not worth the effort but also it may confuse our users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making a new tag just for these small changes isn't worth the effort, and  also it can confuse users.
```

> In other words, having a ``1.0.4`` release that only fixes a sentence in the documentation is not optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Another problem that we have found with this approach is when new features are released on Read the Docs.

> Applying this feature to all of our documentation versions --new ones and old ones, it's a problem.

Reviewer 3: mdash

```suggestion
Applying this feature to all of our documentation versions —new ones and old ones, it's a problem.
```

> Applying this feature to all of our documentation versions --new ones and old ones, it's a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding this new feature to all of our documentation versions is impossible. 
```

update one of its settings, change the theme,
or even change a build config in the `.readthedocs.yml`_,
you will be "blocked" by the tags being static.

Recommended versioning strategy
-------------------------------

> **The workflow we recommend for versioning your documentation is having release branches.**

Reviewer 4: I get that this idea effectively encourages projects to follow Trunk Based Development https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/ but there are other schemes https://www.toptal.com/software/trunk-based-development-git-flow

I wonder how applicable this is for projects not following Trunk Based Development

> The workflow that we recommend to versioning your documentation is by having release branches instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The workflow we recommend for versioning your documentation is having release branches.**
```

With this approach, if a reader detects a typo in the documentation,
we can just fix the typo and commit and push to this ``1.0.x`` release branch.
By doing this, the documentation will be automatically updated and published on Read the Docs.

Following our example, this strategy would be:

* ``1.0.x`` is a release branch for the ``1.0`` version
* ``1.0.3`` is a similar tag for your ``1.0.x`` branch, with the latest release
* ``1.0.0`` is the first tag for your ``1.0.x`` branch.

> 

Reviewer: I feel like we need to expand more on this. This mostly matches what I had here: https://www.ericholscher.com/blog/2016/jul/1/sphinx-and-rtd-for-writers/#recommended-versioning-system -- but what do we do with the tags and old links to `1.0.3` when `1.0.4` is released? I think we need a bit more guidance there.

Author: Yes. I took the inspiration from there and my goal was to expend it and make it better. I failed :slightly_smiling_face:

Reviewer 2: I think the key is that if there will be more 1.0.x releases, there should be a release branch and documentation builds off that branch. If you have a typo in the docs or an example in the docs that doesn't work, you just make a new version and the `1.0.x` docs get updated.

It also depends on whether there will be multiple concurrent versions. For example, Django is currently supporting 1.11.x, 2.1.x and 2.2.x and there are large differences between these. Users definitely should be looking at the right docs for their version.

If instead, you just want to have a few old versions of the docs around for users using the old stuff then I think tags are mostly fine. However, again if you're following semver you probably don't need docs for `1.0.3` and `1.0.4`. I think that's worth mentioning in this post!

Reviewer 2: > if you're following semver you probably don't need docs for 1.0.3 and 1.0.4

I mean you have the docs in VCS but you don't need published docs for both when they're basically exactly the same.
